On-farm testing of a nutrient management decision-support tool for rice in the Senegal River valley .

We evaluated recommendations provided by a cloud-based decision-support tool named Nutrient Manager for Rice (NMR) in terms of yield of irrigated lowland rice and profitability in comparison with farmers' fertilizer management practices (FFP) in the Senegal River valley. A total of 102 on-farm trials were conducted over the three seasons (2011 wet season, and 2012 and 2013 dry seasons). On average in each season, NMR recommendations increased rice yield by 1-2.3 t/ha and profitability by US$ 216- 640 per ha compared to FFP. Differences between FFP and NMR performance were mainly related to timing of the top-dressing of N fertilizer (delayed in the case of FFP), the number of N fertilizer applications (generally just one top-dressing for FFP; two or three for NMR), and application of K. We conclude that NMR offers a promising avenue for increasing the productivity and profitability of irrigated lowland rice in the Senegal River valley. 2015 Elsevier B.V. all rights reserved.

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture
journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate /compag
On-farm testing of a nutrient management decision-support tool for rice in the Senegal River valley
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2015.06.008 0168-1699/ 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Abbreviations: AEN, targeted agronomic efficiency of N fertilizer; AEZ, agro-ecological zone; DAP, di-ammonium phosphate; DAS, days after sowing; FFP, farmers' fertilizer practice; FK, K fertilizer requirement; FN, N fertilizer requirement; FP, P fertilizer requirement; GY, target grain yield; GY0N, grain yield without N fertilizer; KCR, K retained in residue from previous crop; NMR, Nutrient Manager for Rice; PA, P from atmospheric deposition; PCR, P retained in residue from previous crop; RIE, reciprocal internal efficiency; SRV, Senegal River valley; SSNM, site-specific nutrient management. ^ Corresponding author. Tel.: +229 64 18 13 13.

E-mail addresses: K.SAITO@CGIAR.ORG (K. Saito), Zalebilo@yahoo.fr (S. Diack), I.Dieng@cgiar.org (i. Dieng), K.Ndiaye@cgiar.org (M.K. N'Diaye).

Kazuki Saito a,^, Salif Diack b, Ibnou Dieng a, M. Kabirou N'Diaye c
a Africa Rice Center (AfricaRice), 01 BP 2031 Cotonou, Benin b Societe Nationale d'Amenagement et d'Exploitation des Terres du Delta du fleuve Senegal et des Vallees du fleuve Senegal (SAED), BP 74 Saint-Louis, Senegal c AfricaRice, BP 96 Saint-Louis, Senegal
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history: Received 7 January 2015 Received in revised form 8 June 2015 Accepted 13 June 2015 Available online 24 June 2015
Keywords: Field-specific nutrient management Irrigated rice Nutrient balance West Africa
a b s t r a c t
We evaluated recommendations provided by a cloud-based decision-support tool named Nutrient Manager for Rice (NMR) in terms of yield of irrigated lowland rice and profitability in comparison with farmers' fertilizer management practices (FFP) in the Senegal River valley. A total of 102 on-farm trials were conducted over the three seasons (2011 wet season, and 2012 and 2013 dry seasons). On average in each season, NMR recommendations increased rice yield by 1-2.3 t/ha and profitability by US$ 216- 640 per ha compared to FFP. Differences between FFP and NMR performance were mainly related to timing of the top-dressing of N fertilizer (delayed in the case of FFP), the number of N fertilizer applications (generally just one top-dressing for FFP; two or three for NMR), and application of K. We conclude that NMR offers a promising avenue for increasing the productivity and profitability of irrigated lowland rice in the Senegal River valley.
2015 Elsevier B.V. all rights reserved.

1. Introduction .

In Senegal, only about 40% of total rice (Oryza spp.) consumption is satisfied through domestic production (ANSD, 2011). High dependence on imported rice renders the country vulnerable to international market shocks with severe consequences for food security and political stability (Seck et al., 2010). The Senegalese government aims to increase rice production through support to irrigated-rice farmers in the Senegal River valley (SRV). Average rice yield is generally high in both wet and dry seasons at 5.4 and 6.6 t/ha, respectively; however, there is large variation among farmers (e.g. Wopereis et Al., 1999; Poussin et Al., 2003). Wopereis et al. (1999) report that yield gaps between potential yield simulated by the ecophysiological crop model ORYZA_S (Dingkuhn,
1995; Dingkuhn and Sow, 1997) and actual yields obtained by farmers ranged from 1.8 to 8.2 t/ha, suggesting that there was large scope for improving rice yield in this area. It has been reported that farmers generally did not follow recommended sowing time, fertilizer rates, and timings - they generally sowed late, applied late and in excess (Wopereis et al., 1999; Poussin et al., 2003; Tanaka et al., 2015). Following these findings, Haefele et al. (2000, 2001) conducted on-farm trials and found that improved nutrient management increased yields by about 1 t/ha in farmers' fields.

Based on these numerous studies, recommended N rates by Societe Nationale d'Amenagement et d'Exploitation des Terres du Delta du fleuve Senegal et des Vallees du fleuve Senegal (SAED) range from 133 to 179 kg/ha, applied as di-ammonium phosphate (DAP) at around sowing or transplanting, and three splits of urea (at early tillering, panicle initiation, and booting) (SAED, personal communication). Differences in application rates depend on season and agro-ecological zone. The recommended rate is higher in the dry season (Haefele and Wopereis, 2004), and higher in the Senegal River delta than in the middle valley, where extreme temperatures tend to occur and affect potential yield. Recommended P2O5 and K2O rates are 46 and 0 kg/ha, respectively. K2O fertilizer application is not recommended because K inputs from irrigation water and from dust depositions are considered sufficient (Haefele and Wopereis, 2004). In a previous study, K2O fertilizer application was recommended when target yield was 8 t/ha or
more (Haefele and Wopereis, 2004). But, when this recommendation was developed, most of farmers did not carry out double cropping and target high yield.

Most rice farmers in Africa depend on blanket recommendations, despite the fact that optimal amounts and sources of nutrients to meet the needs of the crop depend on many factors, such as indigenous soil nutrient supply, variety choice, and target yield. Scientists at the West Africa Rice Development Association (WARDA, now Africa Rice Center [AfricaRice]) developed variety-, site- and season-specific recommendations on nutrient management for irrigated lowland rice in Burkina Faso, Mali, and Senegal (Haefele et al., 2003; Haefele and Wopereis, 2004; Segda et al., 2005). Simulation models such as ORYZA_S and RIDEV were used to determine potential yield level as a function of sowing date, location, and variety choice (Dingkuhn, 1995; Dingkuhn and Sow, 1997). However, none of these approaches allowed for field-specific recommendations.

Recent advances in information technology and mobile communications make it possible for extension workers and farmers to generate variety-, field-, and season-specific recommendations on crop management practices for rice by using a smartphone or tablet. The International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) has developed a cloud-based decision-support tool named Nutrient Manager for Rice (NMR) to deal with such specificity and provide farmers with field-specific nutrient management recommendations before the cropping season (the version currently in the public domain is called Crop Manager; http://cropmanager.irri.org/). This approach relies on the scientific principles determined during 15 years of site-specific nutrient management (SSNM) research across Asia (e.g. Dobermann et Al., 2002; Buresh et Al., 2010). NMR provides advice on when, how much, and what sort of fertilizer to apply. NMR can be accessed through a personal computer, smartphone, or tablet by agricultural extension officers or lead farmers. The recommendations are calculated from farmers' replies to questions about the agro-ecological or administrative zone of their field, the variety of rice, availability of irrigation water, previous crop and management of its residue, previous rice yield levels, and fertilizer use. Although information is still limited on the impact of NMR on yield and profitability in Asia, it has been reported in the Philippines that fertilizer management based on NMR increased yield by 0.37 t/ha per season (Gabinete and Buresh, 2013). This gain was similar to values observed in previous studies on SSNM in Asia (Dobermann et al., 2002). IRRI and AfricaRice have worked together to develop NMR for the SRV through the use of data on yields from previous fertilizer trials in irrigated lowland rice in West Africa for estimating indigenous N supply (e.g. Wopereis et al., 1999; Haefele and Wopereis, 2004), potential yield and optimum sowing windows (Dingkuhn and Sow, 1997), and expert knowledge on crop duration of popular varieties and crop management in the SRV. This paper describes the framework of NMR developed for the SRV and reports on its evaluation on farm during three growing seasons (2011 wet season, and 2012 and 2013 dry seasons). The objective of this work was to compare rice yields obtained using NMR recommendations with yields obtained by farmers not using the tool (FFP).

2. Material and methods .

2.1. Description of the study area .

The Senegal River valley (SRV) is located in the tropical - warm/arid zone (Saito et al., 2013). Five agro-ecological zones (AEZs) are locally distinguished in this area (Haefele and Wopereis, 2004). In this study, we considered AEZ I and AEZ II as the Senegal River delta, and AEZ III and AEZ IV as the Senegal River
middle valley. Average annual rainfall is about 200 mm with one rainy season (July-September). Solar radiation is high and for a large part of the year ranges from 20 to 30 MJ/(m2 day). Temperature is variable across AEZs, but the coastal area is cooler than the continental area (Dingkuhn, 1995). Soils are generally course to medium textured in the delta, and medium to fine textured in the middle valley (Haefele and Wopereis, 2004). The irrigated lowland rice production system in this study area has been described in numerous studies (e.g. Wopereis et Al., 1999; Haefele and Wopereis, 2004).

2.2. Framework of Nutrient Manager for Rice for the Senegal River valley .

NMR for SRV has been developed by IRRI as an HTML5 application which means it can be accessed through a web browser, using any of the major operating systems with equal effectiveness, from a smartphone or a personal computer (http://webapps.irri.org/nm/ wa/). For this paper, we used NMR pre-release version 1. The NMR recommendations are based on information obtained on the following:
Agro-ecological zone (i.e. Senegal River delta or middle valley) Size of the field Number of rice crops to be cultivated per year (one or two) Season (wet or dry) Rice variety to be sown Crop establishment method (transplanted or direct seeded) Approximate rice yields in previous seasons Portion of residues from previous crop retained in the field (i.e. short or long stubble) Expected water supply level during rice growing season (adequate or inadequate) The type of fertilizers to be or already purchased.

A flow chart for determining N, P, and K fertilizer application rates and timing is shown in Fig. 1. White boxes indicate input data obtained from previous studies, reported by experts in this region, or calculated intermediate outputs. Gray and black boxes indicate input information from farmers and outputs, respectively. Potential yield and crop duration were calculated from information on season, AEZ, choice of variety, and crop establishment method. In previous studies, these were determined using the crop model ORYZA_S with variety-specific photo-thermal parameters using long-term historical weather data (Haefele and Wopereis, 2004). We used expert knowledge on potential yield and crop duration based on observation at the research stations of AfricaRice in the delta and middle valley, as photo-thermal parameters of new varieties are unavailable. Rice growth stages (e.g. panicle initiation, booting) were then empirically determined using information on crop duration of each variety (e.g. panicle initiation equals crop duration minus 60 days). Potential yield of all the varieties in the Senegal River delta was estimated at 9 and 10 t/ha in wet and dry seasons, respectively, and potential yield was taken as 8 t/ha for both seasons in the middle valley. Target yield is determined by a farmer's answers concerning yield level on the same field during previous seasons, and maximum target yield set at 80% of potential yield, as the risk of lowering profitability is higher when target yield is above 80% (Haefele et al., 2003). If there is a large gap between 80% of potential and the farmer's yield level, NMR will propose a large yield increase from the current level. If the gap is small, NMR will propose a small yield increase up to 80% of potential. Also, farmers can modify the target yield, when they are not satisfied with target yield or fertilizer application rate. In this study, difference in target yield and the previous yield level reported by farmers ranged from almost zero to 5 t/ha.

The framework in NMR uses the SSNM approach, which provides scientific principles for determining the amounts of N, P, and K that best match the field-specific needs of rice for supplemental nutrients (Witt and Dobermann, 2004; Buresh et al., 2010, 2012). The fertilizer N required (FN, expressed in kg N/ha) to achieve the target yield is determined from the anticipated yield gain in response to application of fertilizer N and a targeted efficiency of fertilizer N used to obtain the targeted yield (Fig. 1):
FN (1/4) dGY GY0NTh=dAEN=1000Th d1Th
where GY GY0N is the increase in grain yield due to fertilizer N, which is the difference between the target yield (GY) (t/ha) and yield without N fertilizer (GY0N) (t/ha). The GY0N is the N-limited grain yield, which reflects the yield attainable from only non-fertilizer sources of N, referred to as the indigenous N supply. AEN is the targeted agronomic efficiency of fertilizer N (kg grain yield increase per kg of fertilizer N applied). The targeted AEN is adjusted for crop and crop response to N, based on results of field trials conducted across Asia in the development and verification of SSNM principles (Fairhurst et al., 2007). The targeted AEN for rice typically ranges from 16 to 25 kg increase in grain yield per kg of fertilizer N applied. The relationship between GY and GY0N was derived from the results of field trials conducted in six West African countries (Fig. 2). Data are from the SRV in Senegal and Mauritania, northern Ghana, Kou valley in Burkina Faso, Kano in Nigeria, and Office du Niger in Mali (Wopereis et al., 1999; Haefele et al., 2001, 2003; authors, unpublished data). In these trials, rice was grown in irrigated lowland with or without NPK fertilizer application, except for a few trials which included yield with PK fertilizer instead of treatment with NPK fertilizer application. In Asian studies (e.g. Dobermann et al., 2003a,b), GY0N was determined in PK-fertilized plots ('minus N' plots). However, in West Africa, we do not have a lot of data on yield in minus N plots. Thus, we decided to use yield without NPK fertilizer application. This should be feasible, as N is the most limiting nutrient for yield in irrigated rice in West Africa (e.g. Wopereis et Al., 1999; Haefele et Al., 2002). The relationships between yield with NPK fertilizer and GY0N were variable within each country, but there was no large difference in the relationship across the countries: 57% of the variation in GY0N could be explained by one simple regression curve
using GY (Fig. 2). As we did not have any other variables to provide better explanation of the variation in GY0N, we used this regression for estimating GY0N and (GY GY0N) from yield with NPK fertilizer (which is GY). Then, together with AEN, FN was calculated following Eq. (1). Fig. 3 shows the relationship between GY and FN. Thus, in the NMR framework, total N fertilizer application rate is determined by target yield. Use of the simple regression curve in Fig. 2 could eliminate variation in yield response to N fertilizer, and this uncertainty of use of a simple regression without considering other factors is discussed in the discussion section.

With the SSNM approach, P and K fertilizers are applied in sufficient amounts to overcome deficiencies. We used a full maintenance approach for P, and a partial maintenance approach for K, which are described by Buresh et al. (2010). Total P and K taken up by the crop are determined from the target yield and an established optimal reciprocal internal efficiency (kg nutrient in aboveground dry matter per t grain) for each crop (Buresh et al., 2010).

The requirement of a crop for fertilizer P (FP, kg/ha) or fertilizer K (FK, kg/ha) to achieve a GY is estimated from the deficit in the nutrient balance with each input expressed in kg/ha (Buresh et al., 2010) (Fig. 1):
FP (1/4) GY RIEP PCR PA d2Th
FK (1/4) GY RIEK KCR Kw KS KA d3Th
where RIEP is reciprocal internal efficiency for P expressed in kg plant P at maturity per tonne of grain (kg P/t grain) produced, RIEK is reciprocal internal efficiency of K expressed in kg plant K per tonne of grain (kg K/t grain), PCR and KCR are P and K retained in the residues of previous rice crop, Kw is K input with irrigation water (kg/ha), KS is threshold limit for drawdown of soil K reserves (kg/ha), and PA and KA are atmospheric deposition (kg/ha) for P and K. Input of P in irrigation water is treated as negligible. We do not consider inputs of P and K from organic matter as application of organic matter is not popular in the SRV. RIEP and RIEK are 6.2 kg P/t grain and 19.2 kg K/t grain, respectively. PCR and KCR are determined based on farmer's harvesting practice, and harvest indices used for P ([P in grains]/[P in total aboveground biomass]) and K, which are estimated at 0.7 and 0.15, respectively (Buresh et al., 2010). Kw is 35 and 49 kg/ha in wet and dry seasons, respectively, calculated using data from Haefele (2001) with the assumption that irrigated water is 1000 and 1400 mm in wet and dry seasons, respectively. Data for PA and KA are from Herrmann (1996) (data not shown), and PA and KA are the same for both zones, and considered only in the wet season (they are zero in the dry season). KS is estimated at 30 kg/ha in both seasons, based on long-term trials and previous studies (Haefele et al., 2002; Haefele and Wopereis, 2004; Bado et al., 2010), showing that extractable K content in the topsoils did not change without K application even though straw was removed from the fields in long-term trials, and suggesting that the soil K pool could be replenished by nonexchangeable soil K and/or capillary rise during the non-cropped part(s) of the year.

In the NMR framework, FP and FK were calculated based on season (wet or dry), approximate rice yield in previous season, portion of residues from previous crop retained in the field (i.e. short or long stubble), and target yield (information obtained from individual farmers for each season in this study), as well as input parameters defined above (Fig. 1; Eqs. (2) and (3)). The relationship between GY and FP is shown in Fig. 4. With the given yield in the previous season, FP is mainly determined by target yield, and
moderately by PCR, which is field specific and affected by yield of previous crop, residue management, and PA. Fig. 4 shows that FP is low in the wet season, when long stubbles are retained from the previous crop, and when target yield is low. Difference in FP between wet and dry season (corresponding with PA difference) with the same residue management treatment for a given yield level is similar to the difference in FP between the two residue management treatments for the same season.

The relationship between GY and FK is shown in Fig. 5a and b. In Fig. 5a, for the given yield in previous season, FK is mainly determined by target yield and KCR, and moderately affected by seasonal effects (through combined effect of Kw and KA as they are season specific). Larger effect of KCR on FK than that of PCR on FP is associated with lower harvest indices for K than for P, which indicate that larger part of K was in straw - if large part of straw can be kept in the fields, FK can be significantly reduced.

NMR considers three types of N-, P-, and K-containing fertilizers. Here, it is defined that P-containing fertilizer can have N and/or K elements, whereas Nand K-containing fertilizers do not have PK and NP elements, respectively. Basal fertilizer will be applied within 3 weeks for direct-seeded rice or at transplanting for transplanted rice. Top-dressing of N application is at active tillering, panicle initiation, and booting. But, N application at booting is considered only when target yield is 7.5 t/ha or more (Wopereis-Pura et al., 2002). All the Pand K-containing fertilizers are applied basally in the current version of NMR for Senegal. For calculation of the amount of fertilizers to be applied, rate of P-containing fertilizer is first determined by FP. If P-containing fertilizer includes N and/or K, the N and K applied in the P-containing fertilizer is subtracted from FN and FK. Then, Nand/or K-containing fertilizer is additionally applied as basal fertilizer. If P-containing fertilizer includes N and N rate in P-containing fertilizer is more than target N application rate at basal application, top-dressed N rates at active tillering and panicle initiation are reduced. When P-containing fertilizer includes more K fertilizer than the target FK, FP determines amount of K-containing fertilizer applied, assuming that excessive K has no negative effect of rice growth. This latter is the case when compound fertilizer N-P2O5-K2O 9- 23-30 is used instead of DAP (18-46-0). Fig. 5a and b shows FK determined by P-containing fertilizer that does not include K such as DAP, and when farmers use the compound fertilizer (9-23-30).

From these calculations and field size, field-specific fertilizer application rates and timings are determined, and the information provided to farmers on the output page of the NMR application.

2.3. Experimental design and data collection in on-farm trials .

Rice yields derived by NMR were compared with yields obtained with farmers' fertilizer practices (FFP) in 20, 58, and 24 on-farm trials in the 2011 wet season, 2012 dry season, and 2013 dry season, respectively (referred to as 2011WS, 2012DS, and 2103DS). In total over three seasons, 21 on-farm trials were conducted in the Senegal River delta and 81 in the middle valley.

There were two treatments: (1) FFP and (2) NMR recommendation in 2011WS and 2012DS. In both years, KCl was used as K fertilizer source, although none of the farmers used KCl fertilizer in their FFP. In 2013DS, additional treatment on NMR recommendation was included through use of compound fertilizer N-P2O5- K2O (9-23-30) as K fertilizer source, as this fertilizer was more available than KCl in the market, resulting in three treatments in each farmer's field.

In each rice field, plots of 100-300 m2 were installed for each treatment. There was no replication in each farmer's field. Management practices were left to the farmer, except for fertilizer application. NMR recommendations were determined before the season through interviews with farmers to obtain the information described above. Fertilizer management practice in terms of fertilizer source, timing, and amount planned by the farmer was also collected before the season through interview, and FFP was simulated by the research team. This was to avoid NMR recommendation being copied by the farmers. At maturity, rice yields were obtained from a 10 m2 surface area in the center of each plot, and yields were corrected to 14% moisture content.

2.4. Profitability and statistical analysis .

Fertilizer costs (1 euro = 656 FCFA) were collected from Saed data: Urea, 120 FCFA/kg; Dap, 360 FCFA/kg; KCl, 720 FCFA/kg; and N-p2o5-k2o (9-23-30), 199 FCFA/kg. Paddy price was 125 FCFA/kg. We did not include any costs for bagging and transport of the paddy, or transport and labor for fertilizer application. In this study, profitability was defined as the difference between the value of the paddy and the total cost of fertilizer to be
purchased. We did not include any other cost of crop management, or additional labor cost or bags needed as a result of yield increase.

For each growing season, ANOVA mixed models were fitted for yield, profitability, and fertilizer application rates and timings (Table 1). Treatment was considered as fixed effect and AEZ (here, we consider two zones described above; the Senegal River delta and the Senegal River middle valley), farmer nested into AEZ, treatment AEZ as random effects. For 2013DS, we performed a Tukey's Honest Significant Difference test when there was a significant effect of the treatment (Kramer, 1956). As % of fields receiving second and third top-dress of N (Table 1) are categorical variables, a Fisher's exact test of independence was used to respectively examine the significance of their association with the treatment (Martin Andres and Herranz Tejedor, 1995). All the analyses were conducted using SAS (2008).

Simple linear regression analysis was performed to identify relationships (1) between difference in K2O fertilizer rate between MMR with DAP and compound fertilizer N-P2O5-K2O (9-23-30) and yield difference between two treatments in 2013DS; (2) between sowing date and the difference between actual yield obtained in this study and target yield in NMR; (3) between yield in FFP and yield difference between NMR and FFP; and (4) between yield in FFP and difference in profitability between NMR and FFP.

3. Results .

3.1. Farmers' agronomic practices and rice yields .

Except for 18 farmers in middle valley in 2012DS, fields were direct seeded (manually broadcast). Seeding dates ranged from 22 August to 26 September in 2011WS, from 29 February to 1 April in the 2012DS, and from 5 to 23 March in the 2013DS. In transplanted rice, seedling age at transplanting was between 26 and 35 days. All farmers grew improved varieties. Popular varieties in the wet season were Sahel 202 (65% of farmers) and Sahel 201 (30%), while 60% and 92% grew Sahel 108 in 2012DS and 2013DS, respectively.

Almost all farmers used DAP or urea, and 73% used both. None of the farmers used K-containing fertilizer (Table 1). Timing of basal fertilizer application was on average 26, 33, and 26 days after sowing (DAS) in 2011WS, 2012DS, and 2013DS, respectively, whereas timing of first top-dressing of N on average for each
season was 59-61 DAS (Table 1). Only in 2012DS did some farmers (9%; Table 1) apply N as second top-dressing (at 76 DAS on average; data not shown) (none of the farmers applied it in the other seasons). Total N application rates were similar between 2011WS and 2012DS, both higher than in 2013DS (Table 1). P2O5 application rate was highest in 2011WS. Rice yields were 6.4, 6.4, and 5.1 T/ha in 2011ws, 2012ds, and 2013ds, respectively (Table 1). In 2011WS, actual rice yield was much higher than previous yield reported by farmers before the season, which could indicate that the rice-growing environment was particularly favorable in this season. For the dry seasons, actual yield was on average lower than the previous season.

3.2. Fertilizer recommendation by Nutrient Manager for Rice and rice yields .

Target yields on average were set to 6.4, 7.9, and 7.1 t/ha in 2011WS, 2012DS, and 2013DS, respectively (Table 1). In all the seasons, all the plots with NMR (except for plots with compound fertilizer in 2013DS) received DAP as basal (on average 21, 23, and 14 DAS in 2011WS, 2012DS, and 2013DS, respectively) and at least two top-dressings of N, at mid-tillering stage (35, 38, and 31 DAS) and panicle initiation stage (on average 49, 52, and 46 DAS; data not shown). Similarly, 20%, 97%, and 46% of the plots received a third top-dressing at around booting stage (on average 88, 75, and 75 DAS; data not shown). Twenty, 100, and 71% of the plots received KCl fertilizer. The total of N, P2O5, and K2O application rates (kg/ha) were higher in the dry seasons than in the wet season, mainly because the target yields were higher in the dry season (Table 1). Although the target yields differed between the two dry seasons, total N application rates were not largely different. This is because we modified the formula for the relationship between GY and GY0N in NMR between the two seasons by including additional data. For KCl application, K2O-equivalent application rates differed between the two dry seasons, which could be due to differences in target yields and residue management practices (see Fig. 5). Average yields obtained in NMR were 8.7, 7.6, 6.1, and 6.4 t/ha in 2011WS, 2012DS, and plots with KCl and with compound fertilizer (9-23-30) in 2013DS, respectively (Table 1). There was no significant difference in yield between plots with KCl and those with compound fertilizer. Difference in K2O fertilizer rate between two treatments ranged from 13 to 51 kg/ha across all the farmers' fields. Yield difference between the two treatments were not correlated with difference in K2O fertilizer (r = 0.014, P > 0.05).

Averaged over 102 plots over three seasons, actual yields obtained in NMR were similar to target yield for the NMR recommendation (7.3 vs. 7.3 t/ha; data not shown). However, differences
between actual yield obtained in NMR and target yield for NMR recommendation were 2.3 and 0.1 t/ha in 2011WS and 2012DS, respectively. In the 2013DS, the difference was 0.9 and 0.6 t/ha for plots with KCl and compound fertilizer, respectively. There was also large variation in the difference across fields in each year (Fig. 6). In 31% of the plots, actual yields were within +/-10% of target yields. In 2011WS, the difference was negatively related to sowing date (the difference between actual yield and target yield = 0.06 days of year + 17.7; r = 0.54, P < 0.05). The ''day of year'' ignores the existence of months and numbers each day of the year consecutively. A regression coefficient of 0.06 indicates that the difference was reduced by 0.06 t/ha as sowing was delayed by 1 day. There was no significant relationship between the difference and sowing date in the two dry seasons (data not shown).

3.3. Difference in yield and profitability between plots with NMR and FFP .

On average in each season, rice yield and profitability with NMR were consistently higher than those in FFP across three seasons
(Table 1). Distribution of increase in rice yield in NMR compared to FFP is shown in Fig. 7. The probability of achieving an increase in yield as a result of introduction of NMR was 86%. Yield increase of >1 t/ha was observed in 56% of the plots. This increase was weakly and negatively related to yields in FFP (yield difference between NMR and FFP = 0.17 yield in FFP + 2.5; r = 0.21, P < 0.05). This was also the case for profitability (difference in profitability = 26,630 yield in FFP + 297243; r = 0.25, P < 0.01). On average, N-P2O5-K2O application rates were 137-46-46 and 156-30-0 kg/ha in NMR and FFP, respectively. A combination of delayed basal fertilizer application and first top-dress of N, smaller number of N top-dressings, and no K application in FFP are likely to have resulted in lower yields in FFP compared to NMR (Table 1).

4. Discussion .

This paper describes a framework of NMR for the Senegal River valley, and results of testing of it over three seasons. NMR out-yielded FFP and increased profitability in a wide range of farmers' yield levels across both wet and dry seasons. The advantage of NMR was weakly and negatively correlated with yield in FFP, suggesting that NMR is better for lower-yielding fields than for higher-yielding fields. However, regression lines between differences in yield and profitability between NMR and FFP, and yield in FFP indicate that NMR will not result in lower yield and profitability in high-yielding farmers' fields. Yield increase due to introduction of NMR observed in this study is consistent with previous studies in the SRV (Haefele et al., 2000, 2001), which showed that improved nutrient management increased yields by about 1 t/ha in farmers' fields. Yield increase is mainly due to the fact that farmers' timings of N fertilizer application did not coincide with critical growth stages of rice. Wopereis et al. (1999) suggest that delayed application result in low recovery rates of fertilizer N in the rice crop. We observed that farmers' fertilizer practices, especially delayed fertilizer application timing and number of N top-dressings, have changed little since the 1990s, although the total amount of N fertilizer applied had increased (cf. Wopereis et al., 1999).

In this study, experimental design and treatments tested did not allow us to separate out the contribution of K and other elements in producing higher yield beyond farmers' yield level. In this
study, K was applied in farmers' fields with high target yield, especially where short stubble was retained from the previous crop, by using a partial maintenance approach (Fig. 5). In 2013DS, two K2O fertilizer rates were compared. Plots with higher K2O fertilizer showed small yield advantage (on average 0.3 t/ha), although there was no statistical difference in yield between the K2O rates. K2O fertilizer application has not been recommended in this area. However, Haefele and Wopereis (2004) suggest that in case of double cropping targeting high yield with straw removal, K application is needed as input/output balance becomes more negative. Average yield has been increasing in farmers' fields since the 1990s in statistics reported by SAED (2013), as well as in comparison between Wopereis et al. (1999) and this study. Also, double cropping is becoming common and straw is used as animal feed in this area. Thus, K deficiency might have constrained rice yields in the fields where such practices were recently adopted. Indigenous nutrient supplies in relation to cropping pattern, residue management practices, and yield level should be investigated in this area for further improving NMR.

A previous study in the SRV (Haefele and Wopereis, 2004) developed decision-support systems with special attention to N fertilizer application rate. In Fig. 3, three data points from Haefele and Wopereis (2004) are shown. The N fertilizer application rate in their study was higher than the rate used for NMR at the same target yield. The reason for this difference is the different approaches used to determine N fertilizer requirement. In the Haefele and Wopereis (2004) study, the relation between plant N uptake and yield, 45% N fertilizer recovery rate, fixed indigenous N supply (at 39 kg N/ha), and target yield were used to determine N fertilizer requirement, while our study used the simple regression shown in the Material and methods section and indigenous N supply depends on target yield (as shown in Fig. 2). As our study demonstrated that, on average across all the trials, target yield and actual yield were similar, the higher fertilizer application rates suggested by Haefele and Wopereis (2004) do not seem to be necessary. Haefele and Wopereis (2004) determined P2O5 fertilizer rate of 46-57 kg/ha empirically based on long-term trials to maintain soil P level (Haefele et al., 2002). This is similar to the average rate determined by NMR.

Although on average target yield and actual yield in NMR were similar, there was large variation in difference between them (Fig. 6). As we did not collect data on farmers' crop management practices (except for sowing dates and varieties) or biophysical information such as soil nutrient supply and salinity, we cannot identify the factors that effected such large variation in the difference. However, they are likely to be a combination of weather conditions, indigenous N supply, abiotic stress such as salinity, and crop management practices. It has been repeatedly reported that indigenous N supply and optimal N rates for rice vary widely from year to year, as they are also affected by weather conditions, which determine potential yield (e.g. Dobermann et al., 2002, 2003a). Also, there were large variations in indigenous N supply and crop response to N fertilizer among rice fields in the same region (e.g. Wopereis et al., 1999; Dobermann et al., 2003a). Yield without N fertilizer (GY0N), which is a proxy for indigenous N supply, in the SRV in Senegal varied widely (Fig. 2), ranging from 1.3 to 5.6 t/ha. In this study, we used one simple regression curve for determining the relationship between target yield (GY) (t/ha) and yield without N fertilizer (GY0N) (Fig. 2). In fact, there is large variation in this relationship, and simple regression is not enough to estimate GY0N for determining N fertilizer requirement. To examine variation in N fertilizer requirement in relation to the relationship between GY and GY0N, data with GY0N per GY of at least 0.6 (referring to low N deficiency) and at most 0.5 (referring to high N deficiency) in Fig. 2 were used for developing regression curves and determining N fertilizer requirements. Fig. 8 shows three
regressions between target yield and N fertilizer requirement, the middle one was used for this study. In highly N-deficient fields, more N fertilizer is needed to achieve same target yield level than in slightly N-deficient fields. Where target yield is 6 t/ha, N fertilizer requirement ranged from 92 (slightly N-deficient fields) to 152 kg/ha (highly N-deficient fields). Thus, variation in N-deficiency level among the fields tested in this study could cause large variation in difference between target yield and actual yield. As it is not feasible to measure N-deficiency level in each farmer's field and there is year-to-year variation in indigenous N supply, in-season adjustment of N fertilizer application according to crop N status (e.g. leaf color chart) would help increase N fertilizer rate in highly N-deficient fields, and reduce N application in slightly N-deficient fields (Balasubramaiam et al., 1999; Yang et al., 2003). Such an approach could be incorporated into NMR for the SRV.

Lower actual yields than target yields in this study could also be due to poor crop management practices. We found a negative relationship between sowing date and yield difference between actual and target yields in 2011WS. It has been frequently suggested that delayed sowing in the SRV risks cold-induced spikelet sterility (Dingkuhn, 1995; Dingkuhn and Sow, 1997; Wopereis et al., 1999). Thus, to achieve high yield using NMR, it is essential to sow within the recommended window. Also, since we did not record detailed information on crop management practices, poor crop management practices for land preparation, crop establishment, and weed management might also have resulted in lower yield (Haefele et al., 2000, 2001; Poussin et al., 2003). Haefele et al. (2000, 2001) report that improved weed management practices resulted in yield increase of about 1 t/ha in the SRV. Salinity - a major constraint to rice production in the Senegal River delta (Hafele et al., 1999) - might also contribute to lower actual yields than target yields.

As the cause of difference between target yield and actual yield is a complex issue and a combination of a number of factors, further research is needed to understand these factors and interactions among them for optimizing fertilizer recommendations. However, it is clear that when NMR is introduced, efforts are needed to simultaneously introduce integrated crop management practices to farmers, so that farmers can avoid poor practices and/or alleviate constraints, and will get higher N fertilizer recovery and consequently higher yield.

5. Conclusions .

NMR offers a new approach to increasing the yield of irrigated lowland rice and profitability in farmers' fields in the SRV. However, systematic approaches through compiling field characteristics and farmers' feedback are needed for further fine-tuning of NMR. Introduction of in-season N adjustment could help reduce N input in slightly N-deficient fields/seasons, and increase N input in highly N-deficient fields/seasons. When NMR is introduced, it is essential to disseminate integrated crop management practices to farmers along with it to reduce any potential obstacles which can reduce fertilizer use efficiency.

Acknowledgements .

This study was supported by the Global Rice Science Partnership. Nutrient Manager for Rice for Senegal was developed collaboratively by IRRI, AfricaRice, and SAED. The authors appreciate the contributions of Drs R. Buresh, S. Haefele, and F. Mussgnug in the development of NMR, and feedback from two anonymous reviewers on an earlier draft of the paper.

