Yield, water productivity and nutrient balances under the System of Rice Intensification and Recommended Management Practices in the Sahel .

Consumer demand for rice in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) is increasing faster than for any other cereal. Governments in the Sahel are responding by promoting double-cropping of irrigated rice in the region's river basins, although rising fertilizer and water costs cast doubt on the future profitability of such systems. Despite controversy, the System of Rice Intensification (SRI) is widely promoted as a potential solution to this dilemma. SRI includes transplanting young, single seedlings at wide spacing, compost application, mechanical weed control, and alternate wetting and drying irrigation. However, independent evaluation of the system in comparison to an appropriate control is lacking in SSA, and the Sahel in particular. Responding to this need, we compared SRI to flooded rice production following regionally Recommended Management Practices (RMP), in a five-season experiment in the Senegal River Valley. Our objectives were to evaluate yield, water productivity, fertilizer nitrogen recovery efficiency, partial macronutrient balances and soil quality under both management systems. But because compost production in the Sahel is constrained by low labor and biomass availability, we replaced these materials with waste rice straw, and compared the impact of sole mineral fertilizer application to rice straw residue incorporation with fertilizer addition, under both SRI and RMP. In seasons 1-3, fertilizer alone significantly increased yield, with no differences found between management systems. In season 4, beneficial effects of straw incorporation and fertilizer addition were observed, as significant additive increases in yield, straw and fertilizer nitrogen recovery were found for each management system. In season 5, additive benefits were found only for SRI, although SRI yields never exceeded any fertility management treatment under RMP. Across seasons, water savings from 16% to 48% were obtained with SRI, resulting in significant (11%-45%) increases in water productivity. Combined straw incorporation and fertilizer application helped stabilize partial nitrogen and potassium balances across management systems. Compared to controls, straw incorporation also increased total soil nitrogen and carbon. In contrast to the literature on SRI in the Sahel, our findings indicate that when nutrient additions are held constant, significant yield increases should not be expected over conventionally recommended rice crop management systems. However, should farmers choose to experiment with SRI to reduce water use, they would be most likely to benefit from combining rice straw incorporation with mineral fertilizer, although several seasons may be required for additive yield effects to occur.

Y I
T a b c
a
A R R A
K A R N S S O m 2
( T
0 d
Field Crops Research 130 (2012) 155-167
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Field Crops Research
jou rn al h om epage: www.elsev ier .com/ locate / FC R
ield, water productivity and nutrient balances under the system of rice ntensification and recommended management practices in the Sahel
Imothy J. Krupnika,B,*, Carol Shennanb, Jonne Rodenburgc
International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (Cimmyt), House 9, Road 2/2 (Chairmanbari), Banani, Dhaka 1213, Bangladesh Environmental Studies, University of California, Santa Cruz, 1156 High St, Santa Cruz, ca 95064, USA Africa Rice Center (AfricaRice), East and Southern Africa, P.O. Box 33581, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania
r t i c l e i n f o
rticle history: eceived 16 September 2011 eceived in revised form 31 January 2012 ccepted 2 February 2012
eywords: lternate wetting and drying (AWD) esidue management itrogen use efficiency RI ub-Saharan Africa
a b s t r a c t
Consumer demand for rice in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) is increasing faster than for any other cereal. Governments in the Sahel are responding by promoting double-cropping of irrigated rice in the region's river basins, although rising fertilizer and water costs cast doubt on the future profitability of such systems. Despite controversy, the System of Rice Intensification (SRI) is widely promoted as a potential solution to this dilemma. SRI includes transplanting young, single seedlings at wide spacing, compost application, mechanical weed control, and alternate wetting and drying irrigation. However, independent evaluation of the system in comparison to an appropriate control is lacking in SSA, and the Sahel in particular. Responding to this need, we compared SRI to flooded rice production following regionally Recommended Management Practices (RMP), in a five-season experiment in the Senegal River Valley. Our objectives were to evaluate yield, water productivity, fertilizer nitrogen recovery efficiency, partial macronutrient balances and soil quality under both management systems. But because compost production in the Sahel is constrained by low labor and biomass availability, we replaced these materials with waste rice straw, and compared the impact of sole mineral fertilizer application to rice straw residue incorporation with fertilizer addition, under both SRI and RMP. In seasons 1-3, fertilizer alone significantly increased yield, with no differences found between management systems. In season 4, beneficial effects of straw incorporation and fertilizer addition were observed, as significant additive increases in yield, straw and fertilizer nitrogen recovery were found for each management system. In season 5, additive benefits were found only for SRI, although SRI yields never exceeded any fertility management treatment under RMP. Across seasons, water savings from 16% to 48% were obtained with SRI, resulting in significant (11%-45%) increases in water productivity. Combined straw incorporation and fertilizer application helped stabilize partial nitrogen and potassium balances across management systems. Compared to controls, straw incorporation also increased total soil nitrogen and carbon. In contrast to the literature on SRI in the Sahel, our findings indicate that when nutrient additions are held constant, significant yield increases should not be expected over conventionally recommended rice crop management systems. However, should farmers choose to experiment with SRI to reduce water use, they would be most likely to benefit from combining rice straw incorporation with mineral fertilizer, although several seasons may be required for additive yield effects to occur.
. Introduction
Among the ecosystems in which rice (Oryza sativa L. and ryza glaberrima Steud.) is grown in Africa, the irrigated environents of the Sahel have the highest yield potential (Seck et al., 010), although large volumes of water are required to offset the
* Corresponding author at: International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center CIMMYT), House 9, Road 2/2 (Chairmanbari), Banani, Dhaka 1213, Bangladesh. el.: +880 175 556 8938.

E-mail address: T.KRUPNIK@CGIAR.ORG (Timothy J. Krupnik).
378-4290/$ - see front matter (c) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. oi:10.1016/j.fcr.2012.02.003
(c) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
evaporative demand of the hot and arid climate (de Vries et al., 2010). In response to the rapidly expanding consumer demand for rice, 200,000 ha of irrigation facilities reliant on diesel or electrical water pumping have been constructed in the Sahel (Balasubramanian et al., 2007 updated with FAOSTAT, 2012). With a per capita rice consumption rate of 111 kg year-1, Senegal is both the Sahel's and Africa's largest rice importer (FAOSTAT, 2012). Cereal import dependency undermines food security, and increases vulnerability to price shocks, underscoring the need to increase domestic rice productivity (Seck et al., 2010). Raising annual rice output requires exploitation of both wet- and dry-season production. However, Senegalese
1 ps Res
f t t ( d ( g 2
d y r A c m y i p n ( f p u e m c 2
a p p b M a ( p S a t t i s 2 p R t S
f g q f e t b t s q
i i m e e m h .

56 T.J. Krupnik et al. / Field Cro
armers face increasing input costs due to reductions in ferilizer subsidies and rising fuel prices. Because of increases in he latter, irrigation costs comprise 21-45% of farmers' budgets Krupnik et al., 2012). Combined with increasing municipal water emand and predictions of climate-change induced water scarcity Lahtela, 2003), improving water productivity in Sahelian irriated rice has become an important objective (de Vries et al., 010).

Numerous water-saving technologies for rice have been valiated in Asia, though they remain relatively untested and are not et recommended anywhere in Africa. Most notable are aerobic ice (e.g. Bouman et al., 2007), alternate wetting and drying, or WD (e.g. Belder et al., 2005), and the System of Rice Intensifiation, or SRI (Uphoff et al., 2010). Of these, SRI has attracted the ost attention. SRI techniques include line transplanting of single oung seedlings at wide spacing, mechanical weed control, AWD rrigation, and the application of organic soil fertility amendments, referably compost or manure. SRI's advocates argue these techiques provide very high yields and improve water productivity Uphoff et al., 2010). SRI is now supported by institutions ranging rom farmers' organizations to NGOs and the World Bank, and is romoted in 47 countries globally (CIIFAD, 2011), though its poplarity has not come without controversy. For example, McDonald t al. (2006) argued that SRI yields were no higher than Recomended Management Practices (RMP), and this suggestion spurred onsiderable debate (see McDonald et al., 2008; Uphoff et al., 008).

In addition to yield performance, SRI promotion focuses on ssertions of increased water and nutrient use efficiency. However, eer-reviewed studies presenting scientifically sound data to suport these claims are scant in Africa, while the little work that has een done entails conflicting results. In Mozambique, for example, enete et al. (2008) recorded a 41-46% yield depression on saltffected soils with SRI; while in Madagascar, Barison and Uphoff 2010) documented higher macronutrient recovery and yield comared to farmers' practices. In another study in the same location, RI yields as high as 9.9 t ha-1 were recorded, though rather than ttributing them to SRI per se, Tsujimoto et al. (2009) suggested hey resulted from repetitive, deep tillage and incorporation of up o 35 t compost ha-1 (dry weight equivalent). In the Sahel, interest n SRI has grown following reports of 66% yield increases, 10% water avings, and a doubling of farmers' revenues in Mali (Styger et al., 010), though they compared SRI to current, lower-bound farmers' ractices alone, thereby avoiding comparison to an upper-bound MP control. As McDonald et al. (2006) suggested, the latter pracice could have given similar, if not more favorable results than RI.

To make such a comparison, we present five seasons of results rom an experiment evaluating yield, water productivity, nitroen recovery efficiencies, partial macronutrient balances and soil uality effects of both SRI and RMP. Manure or compost are preerred fertility inputs in SRI. In Mali, for instance, single-season valuations of SRI have used up to 13 t ha-1 of manure in addiion to chemical fertilizers (Styger et al., 2010). However, in the roader Sahel, where compost production and manure applicaion are constrained by low biomass and labor availability, the eason-to-season sustainability of such high application rates is uestionable.

In order to adapt this SRI component to local circumstances, we nstead compared the impact of sole fertilizer application, to fertilzer combined with waste rice straw incorporation as an organic
atter input, in both SRI and RMP. We hypothesized that with qual nutrient additions, yields in the first few seasons of the xperiment would not differ significantly between crop manageent systems. However, we expected that SRI would demonstrate igher water productivity, with stronger yield benefits resulting
earch 130 (2012) 155-167
from straw incorporation and fertilizer addition in the long term, due to increased soil aeration and more rapid residue decomposition under AWD.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Site description
A field experiment was conducted at the Africa Rice Center's Regional Sahel Station at Ndiaye in the Senegal River delta (16o11'N, 16o15'W). Trials were conducted in both the dry and wet season, spanning the 2007-2009 wet seasons. Climate data were collected 300 m from the experiment in a cropped rice field (Fig. 1). Ndiaye's soil is an Orhithionic Gleysol (FAO, 2006), and is comprised of oceanic sediments overlain by alluvial deposits. Texture (0-20 cm) is 16-44-40% sand, silt and clay (Haefele, 2001). Although subsoil materials of marine origin can cause serious soil salinity problems in the region (Ceuppens et al., 1997), initial electrical conductivity was low. Soil properties before the experiment were 0.87 g total N kg-1 and 9.6 g total C kg-1 (analysis with a Vario Max Dry Combustion Analyzer, Elementar Americas, Mt. Laurel, NJ following the IOS (1998)), 5.81 kg P-Olsen kg-1 (measured following extraction in 0.5 M NaHCO3 at pH 8.5 (Olsen et al., 1954)), 0.47 cmol exchangeable K kg-1 (atomic absorption spectroscopy after extraction in 1 M NH4OAc at pH 7), pH of 4.76 (1:2.5 H20 saturated paste) and EC 0.33 dS m-1 (1:5 H20 saturated paste).
2.2. Experimental design and establishment
A split-plot experiment with four replicates was established. Main plots were crop management systems, RMP and SRI (Table 1). Sub-plots measured 25 m2, and consisted of four randomized treatments:
1. A no straw or mineral fertilizer additions control treatment (-ST-F). 2. A straw-only control treatment with 5 t ha-1 (dry weight) rice straw incorporated before transplanting, but without mineral fertilizer (+ST-F). 3. Mineral fertilizer only (-St+F). 4. Rice straw incorporation at the same rate and timing as the straw
only control followed by mineral fertilizer application (+ST+F).

In plots receiving fertilizer, DAP was applied basally (19.3 and 21.5 kg N and P ha-1), and three urea splits were broadcasted into 1-5 cm of water (101.3 kg N ha-1; 40% at early-tillering, 40% at panicle initiation, and 20% at heading). Fertilizer K is generally not recommended by extension officials because of high soil-K reserves (Haefele et al., 2004), and was therefore excluded. Before the experiment, soils were ploughed and disk-harrowed, after which bunds were constructed to isolate main plots. An additional bund was built to contain sub-plots within main plots, and plastic sheeting was installed over all main and sub-plot bunds to 0.5 m depth to eliminate seepage. A 4 m space was also maintained between main plots to prevent lateral water movement.

In the 2007 wet season, rice straw obtained from a neighboring farm was incorporated (0-15 cm depth) into damp soil with a hoe 15 days before transplanting, after which plots were leveled. In subsequent seasons, straw was incorporated 19-21 days before transplanting. Straw N and C concentrations were determined by combustion (Vario Max N/C Analyzer, Elementar Americas, Mt. Laurel, NJ, Table 2). Phosphorus and potassium were determined following Yoshida et al. (1976) and Walinga et al. (1989). The short-duration O. sativa cultivar Sahel-108 (IR-13240-1082-2-3) was grown during all seasons. Transplanting for both
T.J. Krupnik et al. / Field Crops Research 130 (2012) 155-167 157
1 ps Res
m a d t o s 2 t c
Q
w H V v h r o t t d u i s t t i r N a a t i c o H t A T i a d e 2 v ( c f t h c .

58 T.J. Krupnik et al. / Field Cro
anagement systems took place on 7 (2007 and 2008 wet season) nd 25 (2009 wet season) August and on 19 March (2008 and 2009 ry season).
.3. Water inflows and water table depths
Water used for seedbeds, land preparation and postransplanting irrigation was quantified by recording the height f water passing through V-notched weirs placed at the inlet of eedbeds and main plots, at 1-min intervals for seedbeds, and -min intervals for main-plots, respectively. After passage through he weir, water was equally distributed to sub-plots. Irrigation was alculated as:
= 13.8 tan
( ) H2.5 (1)
here Q is water discharged (l min-1), is the angle of the weir, and is the water head level (cm) measured before passing through the -notch (USBR, 2001). Q was combined with precipitation and conerted to m3 of water ha-1 applied for the entire season. Field water eight within sub-plots was measured daily in open-ended, perfoated PVC tubes (30 cm diameter). Ground water depths (0-1.5 m) utside experimental plots were similarly monitored with 12 PVC ubes (6 cm diameter), each placed 4 m from main plots. Percolaion in RMP sub-plots was measured in 60 cm long closed tubes (30 iameter) placed into the subsoil until 45 cm depth. Drainage volme was calculated as the difference in standing field water height mmediately before and after drainage events, multiplied by plot urface area.
.4. Chemical composition of irrigation, flood and rainwater
When a floodwater layer was present, EC was measured at least wice weekly with a portable meter. Water mineral N concenrations were determined during irrigation from a sample taken mmediately before V-notched weirs. Samples were placed on ice, eturned to the lab and filtered through Whatman No. 42 paper. H4 + and NO3 - concentrations were subsequently measured with n auto-analyzer (Seal Analytical, Mequon, WI) following Andersen nd Ingram (1989). Precipitation and floodwater samples, the later collected immediately before drainage events, were analyzed n the same way. Mean irrigation, flood and rainwater mineral N oncentrations were 1.3, 1.7 and 3.6 mg l-1, respectively. Based n previous studies on the same experimental site (Faye, 1996; aefele, 2001; Samba Diene, 1998), P and K concentrations in irrigaion and floodwater were estimated at 0.1 mg P l-1 and 3.2 mg K l-1. verage rainwater P and K concentrations were derived from hornton (1965) and Peri (1985) as 0.03 mg P l-1 and 1.0 mg K l-1.
.5. Soil and plant sampling
Prior to the onset and at the very end of the five-season experment (hence before straw incorporation in the 2007 wet season, nd at harvest of the 2009 wet season), five soil cores (0-15 cm epth) were taken from each plot to assess total N and C, P-Olsen, xchangeable K, pH and EC. Additional cores were retrieved at 0, 0, 30 and 35 days after transplanting, booting, flowering, and harests in all seasons to determine volumetric water content. Yield corrected to 14% moisture content) was measured at physiologial maturity from 6.25 m2 in each sub-plot. Straw yield, sampled rom the same area, was measured fresh and corrected for moisure content using a 300 g oven dried sub-sample. Six additional ills of rice were sampled to determine grain and straw nutrient oncentrations as described above.
Earch 130 (2012) 155-167
2.6. Data analysis
Water productivity of irrigation and rainwater (WP, kg grain m-3 water) was calculated for main-effects as:
Y
I + P (2)
where Y is grain yield (kg ha-1), I is irrigation and P is precipitation (m3) summed for seedbeds, land preparation and the post-transplanting period. The recovery of N derived from incorporated rice straw without fertilizer application was calculated as:
N+ST-F-N-ST-F
STN (3)
where N+ST-F is N in rice biomass (grain N + straw N) ha-1 in the straw-only sub-treatment, N-ST-F is rice biomass N ha-1 in the no straw or fertilizer additions sub-treatment, and STN is kg N ha-1 applied in incorporated rice straw. Conversely, the recovery of N derived from straw when incorporated with fertilizer was calculated as:
N+ST+F-N-ST+F
STN (4)
where N+ST+F is rice biomass N ha-1 in the straw and fertilizer amended sub-treatment and N-ST+F is rice biomass N ha-1 in subtreatments receiving fertilizer only. The recovery of fertilizer N when applied without straw incorporation was next quantified as:
N-ST+F-N-ST-F
FN (5)
with FN being kg fertilizer N applied ha-1. Finally, the recovery of fertilizer N when applied following straw incorporation was calculated as:
N+ST+F-N+ST-F
FN (6)
Partial N-P-K balances over five seasons were estimated as the summed total of N-P-K inputs from mineral fertilizers, straw application, wet deposition and irrigation, minus the sum of N-P-K exports in harvested grain and straw, and in drainage water.

Data for each season were checked for homoscedasticity and normality following Sokal and Rohlf (1995), and analyzed using JMP 8.0.2 (SAS Institute Inc., San Francisco). Yield, nutrient uptake and recovery, water productivity, and soil quality data were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA). Significant results for separate tests of fertilizer and straw application followed by non-significant interactions indicate additive effects, whereas significant interactions indicate either negative or synergistic effects. When additive or synergistic effects were observed, main management system effects were analyzed.
3. Results
3.1. Grain yield
In the first three experimental seasons, the only significant yield effect was in response to fertilizer application (P < 0.001 for seasons 1-3), which increased yields by an average of 1.7 (2007 wet season), 3.4 (2008 dry season) and 2.6 t ha-1 (2008 wet season) across management systems (Fig. 2). No seasonal differences in yield were observed. In the 2009 dry season, significant management system x fertilizer (P < 0.05) and management system x fertilizer x straw interactions were observed (P < 0.05). Fertilizer application in SRI increased yield by 3.3 and 3.8 t ha-1 when applied alone and in combination with straw, respectively, relative to 3.1 and 2.2 t ha-1 in RMP. The three-way management system x fertilizer x straw interaction was caused by low SRI
T.J. Krupnik et al. / Field Crops Research 130 (2012) 155-167 159
- + 1 n n t s
p s R I i + ( t p i s s f s c o w i s R d s f S
f w e a 4
bove columns (SYSTEM, Crop Management System; +STRAW, with straw; -STRAW onnected by underlines or separated by letters are not significantly different accor
ST-F and +ST-F yields (2.9 and 3.8 t ha-1) alongside a 8.0 t ha-1
ST+F yield, while yield under the same RMP sub-treatment was 0% less than SRI. Both straw and fertilizer application had sigificant yield effects (P < 0.001), though their interaction remained on-significant, indicating additive benefits from their combinaion under both management systems, starting four seasons after traw incorporation began.

In the fifth and final season, a significant system x straw incororation effect (P < 0.001) resulted from higher yields in the +ST-F ub-treatment (4.1 t ha-1) and lower +ST+F yields (6.9 t ha-1) under MP relative to SRI (3.8 and 7.3 t ha-1 for the same treatments). n contrast to previous seasons where only fertilizer significantly ncreased yields, when SRI alone was subject to an ANOVA, -ST-F, ST-F, -ST+F and +ST+F yields were all significantly different P < 0.05), and increased with N application from straw and ferilizers (Fig. 2). In contrast, yields under RMP reverted to a similar attern as the first three seasons, with significant increases only n response to fertilizer (P < 0.001). RMP -ST+F yields were also ignificantly different (P < 0.05) and 22% greater than the correponding SRI sub-treatment. However, no yield differences were ound between management systems when comparing the +ST+F ub-treatment. While a significant additive effect (P < 0.001) of ombined fertilizer and straw application was observed, it occurred nly for SRI. Significant differences between management systems ere also recorded in the last season (P = 0.014), with RMP yieldng slightly more (+0.3 t ha-1) than SRI when averaged across all ub-treatments.
.2. Water management and water productivity
Water inflows to SRI were always significantly less than under MP (P < 0.001 for all seasons). Savings tended to be greater in the ry season, when evaporative demand was higher. The total seaonal volume of irrigation and precipitation used in RMP ranged rom 7537 to 15,632 m3 ha-1 compared to 6345-10,055 m3 ha-1 in RI across seasons (Table 3).

In RMP, field water levels were consistently above the soil surace, with the exception of the first few days after transplanting
hen plots were left moist but not flooded to facilitate seedling
stablishment, and when drainage was performed for herbicide pplication (Fig. 3). Conversely, there was no floodwater in SRI for 2, 52, 53, 54 and 26% of the days in each season from the 2007
out straw; +FERT, with fertilizer; -FERT, without fertilizer). Interactive effects not o Tukey's protected HSD test (df = 1,   = 0.05).
wet season to the 2009 dry season. The 2009 wet season had the lowest number of completely non-flooded days because a series of heavy rainfall events raised water levels in exit canals, thereby inhibiting effective drainage. Percolation in RMP was consistently less than 2.2 mm day-1 in RMP, regardless of seasons (data not shown). In general, below-surface field water depths did not exceed -12 cm under SRI, whereas the maximum above surface floodwater measurement was 6 cm. Soil volumetric water content under SRI remained generally higher than 30%, even during non-flooded periods.

Reduced irrigation volume under SRI resulted in consistently and significantly higher WP compared to RMP, ranging from 11% to 45% across seasons (Table 4). No significant correlations between yield and water use were found for either crop management system, and floodwater EC remained consistently below 0.9 dS m-1 across seasons, regardless of treatment (data not shown).
3.3. Nutrient dynamics
3.3.1. Nutrient uptake from straw and fertilizer Fertilizer application alone had a significant positive effect on crop N, P and K uptake in total biomass measured at harvest during the first three experimental seasons (P < 0.001 for each season). In the 2009 dry season, no difference between management systems in uptake of any macronutrient was found. Both fertilizer and straw application significantly increased N, P and K uptake in SRI and RMP during this season (Fig. 4). The occurrence of a significant fertilizer x straw interaction (P < 0.05) for N uptake also indicated synergistic effects resulting from the combination of fertilizer and straw application under both management systems. Conversely, P and K uptake effects remained additive. In the subsequent 2009 wet season, N uptake in grain and straw, averaged across subtreatments, was significantly less in SRI than in RMP (P < 0.01). Significantly (P < 0.05) less fertilizer N (25 kg ha-1) was taken up in the -ST+F treatment in the former as opposed to latter management system (Fig. 4). In contrast, the combination of fertilizer and straw application resulted in similar N uptake for both management systems. Fertilizer application had significant yield effects in RMP, while straw incorporation did not show any significant effect. Conversely, both fertilizer and straw incorporation were significant under SRI, while their interaction was not. Additive effects therefore occurred under SRI only (Fig. 4). The same additive trend was T.J. K Rupnik et al. / Field Crops R Esearch 130 (2012) 155-167
T.J. Krupnik et al. / Field Crops Research 130 (2012) 155-167 161
F d Ma S
a c a o w
ig. 3. Field water depths (cm, lines) and rainfall (mm, columns) in Recommende enegal for the 2007 wet season through the 2009 wet season.
lso observed for P and K uptake under SRI. Straw and grain K conentrations at harvest of the final season ranged from 1.4%-1.9% nd 0.2%-0.4%. No significant differences in K concentrations were bserved between any treatment combination (data not shown).
.3.2. Straw N recovery Regardless of management system, no significant differences
ere observed between straw N recovery at harvest in either
nagement Practices (RMP) and the System of Rice Intensification (SRI) at Ndiaye,
+ST-F or +ST+F sub-treatments, until the 2009 dry season (data not shown). In this season, both SRI and RMP captured significantly (P < 0.01) more N from applied straw under +ST+F than in +ST-F. Under these circumstances, the recovery of straw N exceeded 0.9 kg N kg N-1 for both management systems. This pattern shifted in the 2009 wet season, during which a significant management system x straw interaction (P < 0.01) and significant main effects (P < 0.01) were caused by a very high recovery of straw N at harvest
162 T.J. Krupnik et al. / Field Crops Research 130 (2012) 155-167
i m s h a a t
F R N -  
n +ST+F plots (1.1 kg N kg N-1). In contrast, neither straw manageent option significantly improved the recovery of N applied in traw under RMP.
.3.3. Fertilizer N recovery In the 2007 wet season, fertilizer N recovery was significantly igher under +ST+F compared to -ST+F sub-treatments across mangement systems (P < 0.05), although this effect resulted from
single, high yielding -ST-F plot in SRI (Table 5). No addiional differences in fertilizer N recovery between management
ig. 4. Uptake of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium in total biomass (+/-standard erro ecommended Management Practices (RMP) and the System of Rice Intensification (SRI) S: not significant) for each season are shown above columns (SYSTEM, Crop Managem FERT, without fertilizer). Interactive effects not connected by underlines or separated by = 0.05).
systems or sub-treatments were observed in this or the following two seasons. In the fourth season, straw incorporation followed by fertilizer application increased the recovery of fertilizer N to 0.43 kg N kg N-1 across management systems. Fertilizer N recovery was also significantly (P < 0.01) higher in SRI compared to RMP (a difference of 0.09 kg N kg N-1), driven by increased recovery in both -ST+F and +ST+F sub-treatments. In the fifth season, a significant management system x fertilizer interaction was observed (P < 0.05), with the recovery of fertilizer N in +ST+F plots reaching 0.64 kg N kg N-1 compared to 0.46 kg N kg N-1 in the -ST+F
r of the treatment mean) at harvest in the 2009 dry season and wet season under . ANOVA results for main and sub-plot treatments (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ent System; +STRAW, with straw; -STRAW, without straw; +FERT, with fertilizer; letters are not significantly different according to Tukey's protected HSD test (df = 1,
T.J. Krupnik et al. / Field Crops Research 130 (2012) 155-167 163
s b S R
3 s e w w I s s a ( W c t b a l s g 4 e p m m s o c s N c t a T
ub-treatment in SRI. Conversely, no differences were found etween RMP sub-treatments, nor was the +ST+F sub-treatment in RI significantly higher than either fertilizer sub-treatment under MP.
.4. Partial nutrient balances and soil quality after five cropping easons
.4.1. Partial nutrient balances No significant main effects were found on partial macronutrint balances after five seasons of consecutive cropping. However, hen no fertilizer or straw was applied, highly negative balances ere found under both management systems for N, P and K (Fig. 5). n comparison, straw and fertilizer application each resulted in ignificant and positive N balances measured across management ystems (P < 0.001). Straw application had no effect on P balnces, while fertilizer addition had a small but significant impact P < 0.001), moving P balances towards the positive in RMP and SRI.
ith the exception of the +ST-F sub-treatment, K balances were onsistently negative, irrespective of management system. Relative o controls, highly significant differences were found for K under oth -ST+F and +F+ST sub-treatments (P < 0.001). Under both mangement systems, the negative balance was less severe under the atter treatment (+F+ST). Because SRI used less water during each eason (Table 3), RMP received on average more nutrients via irriation water than SRI over five seasons (72 vs. 46 kg N ha-1, 5 vs.
kg P ha-1 and 167 vs. 114 kg K ha-1). Precipitation imported an stimated 27 kg N, 0.08 kg P and 8 kg K ha-1 to both RMP and SRI lots over the course of five seasons (Fig. 5).
.4.2. Soil quality parameters No significant effects of crop management system, crop
anagement system x fertilizer application, crop manageent system x straw application, nor crop management ystem x fertilizer x straw application were found on soil total N r C, P-Olsen or exchangeable K after five seasons of continuous ropping (Table 6). But when measured across crop management ystems, straw incorporation significantly (P < 0.05) increased total
(with 17%), total C (with 15%) and exchangeable K (with 11%) ompared to non-fertilized (no fertilizer no straw) plots, respecively. Fertilizer application had a near-significant impact on vailable P (P = 0.054), increasing P-Olsen by 21% to 6.9 mg P kg-1. here were no significant differences in soil pH (range 4.7-6.7)
or EC (range 0.40-1.70 dS m-1) between management systems or sub-treatments, although when compared to baseline data taken in 2007 and measured across all plots, the final values for both pH and EC increased by 16% and 215% to means of 5.51 and 1.02 dS m-1 for both parameters (P < 0.001, data not shown).
4. Discussion
4.1. Yield, water savings and water productivity
Water savings ranging from 16%-48% were obtained under SRI in this study, resulting in increased water productivity compared to RMP. In only two of 20 observed cases SRI yields were significantly lower than in comparable RMP sub-treatments (under -ST-F and -ST+F in the 2009 wet season). But while SRI increased water savings and water productivity, no sustained yield or nutrient recovery advantages were found in comparison to any RMP sub-treatment.

Our results therefore indicate that while there is potential for water saving, farmers in the study region are unlikely to realize yield advantages with SRI compared to other improved crop management options when nutrient additions are held constant. This confirms McDonald et al. (2006, 2008), who suggested that SRI's yield benefits were likely to be limited when compared to an appropriate, upper-bound control system. Our results contrast with reports of high-yielding SRI performance in the Sahel where the SRI was compared to lower-bound farmers' practice controls alone, and with highly unequal nutrient additions (e.g. Styger et Al., 2010). Nonetheless, should farmers choose to experiment SRI to save water, our results show that they would be more likely to benefit over the long-term from combined organic matter (straw) and fertilizer application compared to mineral nutrient additions alone.

Reports of increased water productivity with SRI are common in field station experiments (e.g. Zhao Et Al., 2009). But under on-farm conditions, poor land leveling may increase the risk of submergence and plant loss in field depressions where farmers transplant only single, young seedlings and attempt to practice AWD (Krupnik et al., 2012). Similarly, higher field positions may not receive sufficient water and experience increased weed infestation (Rodenburg and Johnson, 2009). Caution should therefore be employed when extrapolating the results of this and other on-station studies to on-farm situations.
164 T.J. Krupnik et al. / Field Crops Research 130 (2012) 155-167
b - m b r t c s f
p s g u s i t a s e w R l s i t
T T
t
S
RMP) and the System of Rice Intensification (SRI) under four fertility treatments ertilizer) in Ndiaye, Senegal. Because plots were rarely drained, drainage values fo ess than 5 kg ha-1 in total.

Ground water depths during the cropping season were generally etween -30 and -70 cm. SRI field water depths never exceeded 12 cm, above the maximum 15 cm depth for ``safe'' AWD with inimal risk of yield loss (Bouman et al., 2007). No correlations
etween water use and yield were observed, indicating that the oot zone in SRI plots was usually either moist or saturated, and hat drought stress was not encountered. Indeed, volumetric water ontent of soils under SRI was generally higher than 30% (data not hown), well above the permanent wilting point of 25% established or this soil by de Vries et al. (2010).

In landscapes with relatively shallow water tables, for examle in riverside depressions as in this study, or in large irrigation chemes with shallow water tables, Belder et al. (2004, 2005) sugested that water savings between 10% and 30% should be possible sing AWD with little yield penalty because rice roots can access ufficient soil moisture from capillary rise. Water-saving potential s also high on finely textured soils (Belder et al., 2007), such as hose in the current study site. Where soils are coarser, or fields re located in more isolated or higher-elevation irrigation schemes, aving water without reducing yield can be more difficult (Tabbal t al., 2002). In the 2009 dry season, very high water savings (48%) ere observed under SRI without significant yield loss compared to MP. Tuong et al. (1994) showed that small-plot experiments with ow bund to surface area ratios can result in unreasonably high eepage rates and exaggeration of estimated water requirements n flooded treatments. Though the bund to area ratio of sub-plots in his experiment was relatively small (0.7 m m-2), we maintain that
able 6 otal N and C, P-Olsen, exchangeable K, EC and pH across systems after five seasons of co
Fertility managementa Total N (g kg-1) Total C (g kg-1) P-Olsen (
Without fertilizer 0.88 10.0 5.48 b With fertilizer 0.89 10.6 6.93 a
Without straw 0.80 b 9.4 b 6.72 With straw 0.96 a 11.0 a 5.69
F-values Fertilizer application 0.01 ns 0.05 ns 4.07+
Straw application 4.83* 5.31* 0.16 ns
a Main effects or interaction effects (crop management system x fertilizer applica em x fertilizer x straw application) were never significant, and therefore are not reporte
* Indicates significance at P < 0.05; **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ns means not significant. Me Tudent's T-test (DF = 1,   = 0.05). + P = 0.054.

AW, with straw; -STRAW, without straw; +FERT, with fertilizer; -FERT, without ogen and phosphorous may be too small to be visible. Drainage of potassium was
water savings are unlikely to have been overestimated because: (i) seepage was minimized by lining bunds with plastic sheeting and installing them into the soil below the plough layer, (ii) bund over-flow was never observed, and (iii) percolation in RMP was low. Also, (iv) evaporative losses are generally higher from ponded water compared to soil surfaces (Belder et al., 2005), and field water levels in SRI were below the surface for 54% of the time for this season. Thus, the water savings observed likely resulted from reduced seepage, careful irrigation in SRI, and higher evaporative floodwater losses from RMP.

The build-up of alkaline salts could also constrain yield in watersaving management systems in the Sahel (de Vries et al., 2010). In this experiment, soil EC increased dramatically after five seasons, confirming previous observations of the impact of double-cropping at the same site (Haefele et al., 2004). However, EC remained well below the threshold of 2.0 dS m-1 after which yield might be affected (Dobermann and Fairhurst, 2000), and no differences were found between management systems. But because saline deposits are heterogeneously distributed (Ceuppens et al., 1997), further and longer-term research on the potential interaction between AWD irrigation and salinity should be undertaken.

Despite the water productivity advantages of SRI demonstrated in this study, it must be recognized that SRI is by no means the only method to save water without compromising yield. Evidence of good water savings in conventional management systems where AWD alone is implemented, but where crop establishment, weed and nutrient management remain relatively unchanged compared
ntinuous cropping at Ndiaye, Senegal.
mg kg-1) Exchangeable K (cmol kg-1) EC (dS m-1) pH
0.54 1.03 5.42 0.50 1.02 5.68
0.49 b 0.91 5.45 0.55 a 1.11 5.60
2.76 ns 0.00 ns 1.52 ns 4.83* 2.78 ns 0.64 ns
tion, crop management system x straw application, or crop management sysd here. ans within a continuous column are not significantly different using the LS means
ps Res
t 2 a u h b t s w i f s e y r t c i t + t r w s s
a p i + a A e 2 i s r a h C t s r + c s r H r s e b t w i K t K
T.J. Krupnik et al. / Field Cro
o their flooded counterparts, is growing (e.g. Belder et Al., 2004, 005; Cabangon et Al., 2004; De Vries et Al., 2010). Sanjeewanie nd Ranamukharrachchi (2009) contrasted SRI with direct seeding sing AWD in Thailand. Both yield and water productivity were ighest with the latter system. Clearly, further research is needed to racket SRI's performance compared to other management options hat reduce water use.
.2. Recovery of straw and fertilizer nitrogen
Despite the potential for immobilization of fertilizer N when traw residues are incorporated, no negative effects on N uptake ere observed for either system during seasons 1-3 of this experment. In the fourth season, additive N-P-K uptake effects were ound for both crop management systems, but in the fifth and final eason, they were recorded only for SRI. It is not uncommon for sevral seasons to pass before straw incorporation positively affects ield in irrigated rice (Yadvinder-Singh et al., 2005). Delays may esult from the gradual build-up of soil nutrient pools with the susained addition of residues (e.g. Eagle et al., 2000), although when ompared to higher and more balanced mineral N-P-K rates, yield ncreases due to combined organic matter and fertilizer applicaions may not be significant (Dawe et al., 2003). In contrast, the ST+F sub-treatment affected macronutrient uptake more posiively with SRI than RMP in the current study. This suggests that esource-poor farmers unable to afford balanced N-P-K fertilizers ho experiment with SRI could gain from this fertility management trategy, although beneficial effects may only occur after several easons.

The additive SRI yield effects resulting from combined fertilizer nd straw application in the last two seasons of this study can be artially explained by improved recovery both of straw and fertilzer N. In the fourth season, straw N recovery was higher under ST+F compared to +ST-F (a difference of 17 kg ha-1 under SRI nd 7 kg ha-1 under RMP). SRI advocates argue that combined with WD, mechanical weeding aerates the soil and increases N minralization and supply to the crop (Ceesay, 2010; Uphoff et al., 010). However, the improved N uptake and recovery observed n this experiment is unlikely to have been caused by increased oil aeration. Despite the AWD regime, the soil water-status in SRI emained close to saturation. Moreover, volumetric water contents fter weeding tended to be higher than before, because irrigation ad to be introduced to facilitate the movement of rotary weeders. onversely, mechanical weeding may have stimulated mineralizaion by tearing straw into smaller pieces and increasing residue urface area exposed to microbial attack, though additional work is equired to confirm this hypothesis. The recovery of straw N in the ST+F sub-treatment was above 100% in the 2009 wet season, indiating that part of the recovered N was obtained from the labile oil N pool, which was probably augmented through the gradual ecycling of straw N incorporated over the previous four seasons. owever, while improved fertilizer N recovery under SRI has been eported elsewhere (Zhao et al., 2009), it was never statistically uperior to RMP in the current experiment.
.3. Long-term impact on macronutrient balances and soil quality
Both fertilizer and straw inputs, and grain and straw exports, xerted the largest effect on post-experiment partial macronutrient alances in this study. Fertilizer and straw application each posiively affected N balances. Rice straw contains little P, so P balances ere mainly increased by fertilizer alone. And although no fertilzer K was applied, both fertilizer and straw significantly impacted balances. Fertilizer N and P moved K balances towards the negaive because of increased crop growth and uptake of indigenous soil , although in all treatments soil exchangeable K remained above
earch 130 (2012) 155-167 165
the medium K status threshold of 0.45 cmol kg-1, below which fertilizer K might affect yield (Dobermann and Fairhurst, 2000). Moreover, no treatment effects on grain or straw K concentrations were observed at harvest in the last season, and levels of each remained above deficiency thresholds according to Dobermann and Fairhurst (2000). But because straw contains large amounts of K, incorporation in +ST-F and +ST+F treatments helped to offset declining partial K balances.

While KCl fertilizer is recommended for double-cropping (Bado et al., 2010), high costs prohibit its use in the Sahel. Haefele et al. (2004) suggested that fertilizer K may not be necessary because equilibrium reactions between exchangeable and high total K reserves in West Africa's river floodplain soils could maintain levels above the critical limit for decades. While this is advantageous for resource-poor farmers unable to afford fertilizer K, we suggest that straw incorporation in double-cropped systems will help to offset losses, thereby prolonging depletion over longer periods of time, thus improving the long-term sustainability of rice cropping. Further research should be conducted to determine if recommended KCl application rates could be reduced where farmers incorporate rice straw, as reduced fertilizer K requirements would make KCl application more affordable, while also helping to maintain soil quality. Future studies should also examine in situ recycling of straw, as opposed to biomass importation as used in the current study. Finally, when measured at the conclusion of the experiment, straw incorporation led to small yet significant increases in total soil C and N compared to controls, arguably improving soil quality in each crop management system. Straw incorporation also supplies micronutrients (Yadvinder-Singh et al., 2005), which we were unable to examine in this study, potentially providing additional agronomic benefits.

Post-experiment estimates of partial macronutrient balances suggested slightly more positive trends for RMP compared to SRI, in part because of greater nutrient inputs through irrigation, although differences were never significant. But in water-saving systems more reliant on drainage, or where less irrigation is needed, differences could be larger. We estimated P and K concentrations in irrigation, rain and floodwater based on previous studies at the same location. Balances may therefore be slightly less accurate than desirable, although significant error is unlikely because concentrations fell within the bounds of the ranges reported in the literature (see Dobermann and Fairhurst, 2000). Conversely, gaseous N losses, biological N fixation, leaching, inter-season capillary rise, and dry deposition also play a role in nutrient cycling (Cassman et al., 1998; Haefele, 2001), though we were unable to account for them in this study. Nutrient losses via leaching, however, are unlikely to be large in lowland rice fields (Cassman et al., 1998), especially where soils are finely textured and where water tables remain close to the soil surface. This study therefore provides a first-step towards estimating irrigation, wet deposition, and flood water drainage import and export pathways that are typically not included in partial nutrient balance studies. Additional work is needed to quantify the gaps described above, especially in double-cropped, water-saving rice systems, where import and export pathways could significantly differ.
5. Conclusion
We investigated the potential for water savings and the impact of organic (straw) and inorganic soil fertility amendments on yields and nutrient balances under Recommended Management Practices and the System of Rice Intensification over five seasons in the Senegal River Delta. Our results indicate that substantial water savings and increases in water productivity can be obtained with SRI, although significant yield increases compared to RMP should
1 ps Res
n f s N t fia t a i t y r c w m p n t t
A
F t P t S C B ( i A
R
A
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
C
C
C
C
C .

66 T.J. Krupnik et al. / Field Cro
ot be expected. Positive effects resulting from straw incorporation ollowed by fertilizer application became apparent in the fourth eason as significant additive increases in yield, straw and fertilizer
recovery were observed under both RMP and SRI. However, coninuation of these trends was only observed for SRI in the fifth and nal season of the experiment, suggesting that integrated organic nd mineral nutrient management of soil fertility is more advanageous with SRI than RMP. Fertilizer and straw additions also had
positive effect on partial macronutrient balances and soil qualty parameters. Further work should be conducted to investigate he mechanisms underlying these results, and to compare SRI's ield and water productivity performance to other water-saving ice management systems. If farmers in the Sahel practicing doubleropping choose to experiment with techniques like SRI to reduce ater use and thus input costs, our findings indicate that they are ost likely to benefit over time by practicing straw residue incororation followed by mineral fertilizer additions, although when utrient additions are held equal, SRI is unlikely to improve yield rends over long-established Recommended Management Pracices.
cknowledgements
This research was funded by the Robert and Patricia Switzer oundation, a Fulbright, a Rotary International and Annie's Susainable Agriculture Scholarship, and the University of California resident's Fellowship to T.J. Krupnik. We wish to acknowledge the echnical advice of Abdoulaye Sow, Doudou Mbaye, Djibi Sanga, abine Stuerz and Michiel de Vries (all affiliated with Africa Rice enter during the study), Joji Muramoto, Pete Ramondi, Graeme aird, Chris van Kessel (University of California) and Patricia Moulin Institut de Recherche pour le Developpement, Dakar). This paper was mproved with the help of William H. Settle, Deborah Letourneau, my Concillio and four anonymous reviewers.
Eferences
Ndersen, J.M., Ingram, J.S.I., 1989. Tropical soil biology and fertility: a handbook of methods. Cab International, Oxford, UK. ADO, B.V., AW, a., Ndiaye, m., 2010. Long-term effect of continuous cropping of irrigated rice on soil and yield trends in the Sahel of West Africa. Nutr. CYCL. Agroecosyst. 88, 133-141. Alasubramanian, v., Sie, m., Hijmans, R.J., Otsuka, K., 2007. Increasing rice production in Sub-Saharan Africa: challenges and opportunities. ADV. Agron. 94, 55-133. Arison, J., Uphoff, N., 2010. Rice yield and its relation to root growth and nutrient-use efficiency under SRI and conventional cultivation: an evaluation in Madagascar. Paddy water environ. 9, 3-11. Elder, P., Bouman, B.A.M., Cabangon, R., Guoan, L., Quilang, E.J.P., Yuanhua, L., Spiertz, J.H.J., Tong, T.P., 2004. Effect of water-saving irrigation on rice yield and water use in typical lowland conditions in Asia. Agric. Water manage. 65, 193-210. Elder, P., Bouman, B.A.M., Spiertz, J.H.J., 2007. Exploring options for water savings in lowland rice using a modelling approach. Agric. SYST. 92, 91-114. Elder, P., Spiertz, J.H.J., Bouman, B.A.M., Lu, G., Tong, T.P., 2005. Nitrogen economy and water productivity of lowland rice under water-saving irrigation. Field crop res. 93, 169-185. Ouman, B.A.M., Lampayan, R.M., Tuong, T.P., 2007. Water management in irrigated rice: coping with water scarcity. International Rice Research Institute, Los Banos. Abangon, R.J., Tong, T.P., Castillo, e.g., Vao, L.X., Lu, g., Wang, G., Chi, y., Bouman, B.A.M., Li, y., Chen, C., Wang, J., 2004. Effect of irrigation method and N-fertilizer management on rice yield, water productivity and nutrient-use efficiencies in typical lowland rice conditions in China. Paddy water environ. 2, 195-206. Assman, K.G., Peng, s., Olk, D.C., Ladha, J.K., Reicahrdt, W., Dobermann, a., Singh, U., 1998. Opportunities for increased nitrogen-use efficiency from improved resource management in irrigated rice systems. Field crop res. 56, 7-29. Eesay, m., 2010. An opportunity for increasing factor productivity for rice cultivation in The Gambia through SRI. Paddy water environ. 9, 129-135. Euppens, J., Wopereis, M.C.S., Miezan, K.M., 1997. Soil salinization processes in rice irrigation schemes in the Senegal River Delta. Soil SCI. Soc. Am. J. 61, 112-130. Iifad, 2011. The system of rice intensification countries. Cornell International Institute for Food, Agriculture and Development. Ithica. Http://sri.ciifad.cornell.edu/countries/index.html (accessed January 30).
Earch 130 (2012) 155-167
Dawe, D., Dobermann, a., Ladha, J.K., Yadav, R.L., Bao, L., Gupta, R., Lal, P., Panaullah, G., Sariam, O., Singh, y., Swarup, a., Zhen, Q.X., 2003. Do organic amendments improve yield trends and profitability in intensive rice systems? Field crop res. 83, 191-213. De Vries, M.E., Rodenburg, J., Bado, B.V., Sow, a., Leffelaar, P.A., 2010. Rice production with less irrigation water is possible in a Sahelian environment. Field crop res. 116, 154-164. Dobermann, a., Fairhurst, T., 2000. Rice: Nutrient disorders and nutrient management. International Rice Research Institute (Irri), Makati City, Philippines. Eagle, A.J., Bird, J.A., Horwath, W.R., Linquist, B.A., Brouder, S.M., Hill, J.E., Van Kessel, C., 2000. Rice yield and nitrogen utilization efficiency under alternative straw management practices. Agron. J. 92, 1096-1103. FAO, 2006. World Reference Base for Soil Resources 2006: A framework for international classification, correlation and communication. World soil resources reports. Food and Agriculture Organizaton of the United Nations, Rome. Faostat, 2012. FAO Statistical Service. United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. Http://faostat.fao.org/site/291/default.aspx (accessed January 25). Faye, a., 1996. Les criteres de gestion optimum des ressources en eau dans le Delta du fleuve Senegal. Universite Cheikh Anta Diop, Dakar. Haefele, S.M., 2001. Improved and sustainable nutrient management for irrigated Rice-Based cropping systems in West Africa. Hamburger Bodenkundliche Arbeiten Uversitat, P. 240. Haefele, S.M., Wopereis, M.C.S., Schloebohm, A.-m., Weiechmann, H., 2004. Longterm fertility experiments for irrigated rice in the West African Sahel: effect on soil characteristics. Field crop res. 85, 61-77. Ios, 1998. Soil quality -determination of total nitrogen content by dry combustion (``elemental analysis''). International Organization for Standardization, Geneve, Switzerland. Krupnik, T.J., Shennan, C., Settle, W.H., Demont, m., Ndiaye, A.B., Rodenburg, J., 2012. Experiential learning and adaptive research improves irrigated rice production in the Senegal River Valley. Agric. Syst., Doi:10.1016/J.AGSY.2012.01.008. Lahtela, v., 2003. Managing the Senegal River: national and local development dilemma. Int. J. Water Res. Dev. 19, 279-293. McDonald, A.J., Hobbs, P.R., Riha, S.J., 2006. Does the System of Rice Intensification outperform conventional best management? A synopsis of the empirical record. Field crop res. 96, 31-36. McDonald, A.J., Hobbs, P.R., Riha, S.J., 2008. Stubborn facts: still no evidence that the System of Rice Intensification out-yields best management practices (BMPs) beyond Madagascar. Field crop res. 108, 188-191. Menete, M.Z.L., Van es, H.M., Brito, R.M.L., DeGloria, S.D., Famba, s., 2008. Evaluation of System of Rice Intensification (SRI) component practices and their synergies on salt-affected soils. Field crop res. 108, 34-44. Olsen, S.R., Cole, C.V., Watanabe, F.S., Dean, L.A., 1954. Estimation of Available Phosphorus in Soils by Extraction with Sodium Bicarbonate. USDA, Washington, D.C. CII, 939. Peri, C., 1985. Bilans mineraux des systemes de cultures pluviales en zones arides et semi-arides. L'Agron. Trop. 40, 1-20. Rodenburg, J., Johnson, D.E., 2009. Weed management in rice-based cropping systems in Africa. ADV. Agron. 103, 149-218. Sanjeewanie, G.A., Ranamukharrachchi, S.L., 2009. Effect of conventional, SRI and modified water management on growth, yield and water productivity of direct-seeded and transplanted rice in central Thailand. Aust. J. Crop SCI. 3, 278-286. Samba Diene, R., 1998. Riziculture et degradation des sols en vallee du fleuve Senegal: analyse comparee des fonctionnements hydro-salins des sols du delta et de la moyenne vallee en simple et double riziculture, Hydrogeologie. Universite Cheikh Anta Diop, Dakar, P. 176. Seck, P.A., Tollens, e., Wopereis, M.C.S., Diagne, a., Bamba, i., 2010. Rising trends and variability of rice prices: threats and opportunities for sub-Saharan Africa. Food Policy 35, 403-411. Sokal, R.R., Rohlf, F.J., 1995. Biometry: the principles and practice of statistics in biological research, 3rd ed. W.H. Freeman, New York. Styger, e., AG Atter, m., Guindo, h., Ibriham, H., Diaty, m., Abba, i., Traore, m., 2010. Application of System of Rice Intensification practices in the arid environment of the Timbuktu region in Mali. Paddy water environ. 9, 137-144. Tabbal, D.F., Bouman, B.A.M., Bhuiyam, S.I., Sibayan, E.B., Sattar, M.A., 2002. Onfarm strategies for reducing water input in irrigated rice; case studies in the Philippines. Agric. Water manage. 56, 93-112. Thornton, i., 1965. Nutrient content of rainwater in the Gambia. Nature 205, 1025. Tsujimoto, y., Horie, T., Randriamihary, h., Shiraiwa, T., Homma, K., 2009. Soil management: the key factors for higher productivity in the fields utilizing the System of Rice Intensification (SRI) in the central highland of Madagascar. Agric. SYST. 100, 61-71. Tuong, T.P., Wopereis, M.C.S., Marquez, J.A., Kropff, M.J., 1994. Mechanisms and control of percolation losses in irrigated puddled rice fields. Soil SCI. Soc. Am. J. 58, 1794-1803. Uphoff, N., Kassam, a., hardwood, R., 2010. SRI as a methodology for raising crop and water productivity: productive adaptations in rice agronomy and irrigation water management. Paddy water environ. 9, 3-11. Uphoff, N., Kassam, a., stoop, W.A., 2008. A critical assessment of a desk
study comparing crop production systems: the example of the 'System of Rice Intensification' versus 'best management practice'. Field crop res. 108, 109-114. USBR, 2001. Water measurement manual. Water resources technical publication, Washington, DC.
PS Res
W
y
T.J. Krupnik et al. / field Cro
Alinga, i., Van Vark, w., Houba, V.J.G., Van Der Lee, J.J., 1989. Plant analysis procedures. Soil and Plant Analysis: Part 7. Wageningen Agricultural University, Dept. of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, Wageningen. advinder-Singh, Bijay-Singh, Timsina, J., 2005. Crop residue management for nutrient cycling and improving soil productivity in rice-based cropping systems in the tropics. ADV. Agron. 85, 269-407.
Earch 130 (2012) 155-167 167
Yoshida, s., Forno, D.A., Coch, J.H., Gomez, K.A., 1976. Laboratory Manual for Physiological Studies of Rice, 3rd ed. International Rice Research Institute (Irri), Los Banos, Philippines. Zhao, L., Wu, L., Li, y., Lu, x., Zhu, d., Uphoff, N., 2009. Influence of the System of Rice Intensification on rice yield and nitrogen and water use efficiency with different N application rates. EXP. Agric. 45, 275-286.

